00N000000000000000000ﬁ*00000000000000000000000000000000¬†400
Å.00000000Ê∞30000000000‹+00000000000000000000000000Y00000000ü
00<00006?000000007(000000000000000000Ò;0000Ï≠	Ω000000000000
0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000%00ÿ0000
0000000000ú00%000000000000x0000%70000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000000ê0000000000000000000000000000è'ó<0000_90000
000000È900G#û%72700u"00ù¸00000000000000000Z 00±/000000000000é6
000000000000
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

*ROADS
Roads of good quality improved communications between cities. This was
important for trade and for military purposes. Good quality roads were
passable in nearly all weather, and could be traversed by wheeled vehicles
much faster than bare dirt trails. This meant that mounted messengers,
commercial wagons, and military units all could move from one part of the road
network to another at good speed. This made it easier for centrally located
armies to reach threatened frontiers. The most famous roads of antiquity were
the Persian Royal Road and the Roman roads built throughout southern Europe.
*ROADS2
Built by Settlers only. Press the Road key (R key) or select Build Road from
the Orders menu. Roads may not be built over Rivers until you have acquired
Bridge Building.
Units moving from one road square to another road square use
1/3 of a movement point regardless of terrain. Roads increase
the trade generated by Grasslands, Plains, and Deserts.

*RAILROADS
Railroads revolutionized transportation by providing a relatively cheap and
fast method of moving people, raw materials, finished goods, and military
units. Railroads were essential to the Industrial Revolution. Not only did
they support and encourage industrial growth by dramatically reducing
transport costs, but they spurred technological research on their own.
Advances in locomotive technology and engineering spun off into other
industries and applications. Railroads were the first great industrial
corporations.
*RAILROADS2
Built by Settlers only, and only in squares that already contain a road.
Press the Railroad key (R key).
Units moving from one railroad square to another railroad square
use no movement points regardless of terrain. Railroads increase
food and resource production in a map square by 1/2 (rounded down).
They increase trade by the same amount, but before the effects of
Republic or Democracy governments.

*IRRIGATION
When the early farmers moved down from the hills into the valleys of
the Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates Rivers, they had to develop the technology of
irrigation. The freshwater rivers passed through lands essentially barren due
to the lack of rainfall. Through irrigation, water could be removed from the
rivers and spread on the nearby land, making it bloom. Ever since these early
days, irrigation has been an important tool of farmers, making other deserts
bloom as well. Modern examples are the very productive deserts of California.
*IRRIGATION2
Irrigation increases the food value of River, Grassland, Plains, Desert, and
Hill squares. Only squares vertically or horizontally adjacent to water
(Ocean or River) or existing irrigation squares may be irrigated.

*MINING
When thinking humans first evolved, it was possible to find nearly pure
deposits of several metals exposed on the Earth's surface. The most common
were gold, silver, and copper. As time passed, the surface deposits were
exhausted and men began digging into the ground looking for more. The mining
and excavation of the Earth in search of minerals continues today, although
the list of things for which we dig has greatly expanded. The discovery of
new metals and resources, or new methods of extraction, often turned
previously unwanted areas into mother lodes of oil, uranium, platinum, etc. 
*MINING2
Mining increases the production value of Desert (+1), Hills (+3),
and Mountain (+1) squares.

*FORTIFY
Roman legions on campaign halted their march early enough each evening to
build a completely fortified camp for the night. They had learned the value of
defensive fortifications when under attack. Where possible, it was the
standard practice of most armies to build defensive works of some type
whenever expecting an attack. Fortified defenders had their fighting strength
multiplied, making it much harder for an attacker to dislodge them.
*FORTIFY2
A fortified unit has its defense value increase by 50%.

*FORTRESS
To guard important positions such as mountain passes, fords, or invasion
beaches, you may build a Fortress. When properly defended, a Fortress may
block the path of approaching enemies. Fortresses may be built by Settlers
once you have achieved the advance of Construction. They may be built on any
land square except one containing a city. A city founded in a Fortress square
destroys the Fortress. A Fortress doubles the strength of all defending units
after considering terrain and veteran status. Units defend a Fortress one at
a time. Unlike combat in normal terrain, all other defenders in a Fortress
are not destroyed when one unit in the square is destroyed.
*FORTRESS2
Built by Settlers only. Press the Fortress key (F key) or choose the Fortress
option from the Orders menu.
Doubles the strength of defenders.
Units defend one at a time.
May not be built or exist in a city square.

*PILLAGE
You may destroy the irrigation and mining improvements of enemies by moving
a unit into an improved square and ordering the unit to pillage. This reduces
the production of the nearby city and forces the enemy to redo the work later
to restore it. If you have plans to capture the nearby city, it may be best
not to pillage because the city and production may soon be yours. 
*PILLAGE2
Any square improved by mining or irrigation may be pillaged by pressing the Pillage key
(Shift + P key) or by choosing the Pillage option from the Orders men. The
pillaging unit must have movement remaining.

*DISBAND
At times you may wish to eliminate friendly units. They may be obsolete, or
costing resources to maintain that you wish to employ otherwise, or they may
be causing unhappiness in their home city under the Republic or Democracy
governments. To eliminate an unwanted unit, order it to disband. The unit is
removed from the map and its home city display.
*DISBAND2
To disband a unit waiting for
orders, press the Disband key (Shift + D keys) or select the Disband option
from the Orders menu.

*VETERAN UNITS
During the American Civil War, green units that had never been in battle were
said to have "seen the elephant" after being under fire for the first time.
They were now veterans, having been witness to, and part of, something that
could never be completely conveyed to those without the experience. The
historical evidence shows that trained, veteran soldiers were dramatically more
likely to survive and perform their combat mission than inexperienced troops.
For American replacements in World War II, the first two weeks in combat were
the most dangerous. After that period they had become veterans and wily in the
ways of battlefield survival.
*VETERAN UNITS2
Veteran units have their attack and defense values increased by 50%.
Units may become veterans by winning a battle or if built in a city
with a Barracks.

*ANARCHY
Anarchy is a breakdown in government resulting in the absence of political
authority or any cohering purpose. The government ceases to function, along
with any services it provides. While anarchy has been seriously proposed as an
alternative to government, it has never achieved more than fringe acceptance.
Anarchy has occurred at various times in history following great social
upheaval caused by revolution, war, natural disaster, or disease. In almost
every case, anarchy meant panic, disruption, waste, and destruction.
*ANARCHY2
Squares producing three or more of any commodity have production reduced
by one. For example, a square that normally would produce three food produces
only two under anarchy.
Units up to city size do not require maintenance.
Military units in a city decrease unhappiness.
No taxes collected or knowledge accumulated.

*DESPOTISM
Despotism is a primitive form of government that is nevertheless useful for a
beginning civilization. Due to the minimum of maintenance required for units,
it is possible to field relatively large armies for the population and build
new items quickly. However, the growth of cities is ultimately retarded by
despotism and in order for them to continue to grow to substantial size you
must adopt a new form of government that increases food and resource
production. Despotism is most useful during expansion and wartime.
*DESPOTISM2
Production squares of 3 or more reduced by one (3 food->2).
Home city units numbering less than or equal to city size do not require
maintenance.
Military units in city decrease unhappiness.

*MONARCHY
Monarchy is the form of government that most often replaces a despotism. Under
a monarchy, food and resource production can both be dramatically increased
by mining and irrigation when your cities have reached a healthy size.
Although war may be somewhat more difficult to wage than under despotism and
new production may slow, ultimately your cities can achieve much greater
strength and overcome the early handicaps this government might impose.
*MONARCHY2
Normal economic effects.
Units require 1 resource per turn to maintain.
Military units in city decrease unhappiness.

*COMMUNISM
Communism is similar in effect to a monarchy with one important exception.
Under a communist government, corruption is at the same level in all cities.
This makes it especially attractive for empires that are spread over large
distances. Normally in this case, corruption may be overwhelming at the
fringes of the empire. But under communism, corruption may remain manageable.
Communism is equivalent to the monarchy in its ability to allow greater
production than a despotism.
*COMMUNISM2
Normal economic effects.
Units require 1 resource per turn to maintain.
Military units in city decrease unhappiness.
Corruption equal in all cities.

*REPUBLIC
The "republican" form of government encourages greater economic freedom among the
people and leads to dramatic increases in trade. More trade means more
luxuries, tax revenues, and science research. However, under a republic war
is much more difficult to wage because military units not in their home city
cause one citizen to become unhappy. Most cities can therefore only afford to
have a few military units on campaign without risking civil disorder. The
republic becomes especially useful when your cities have grown quite large,
because the increase in trade is very helpful in providing luxuries and
maintaining a reasonable rate of technology advance.
*REPUBLIC2
+1 trade per square where trade exists.
Must accept all peace offers.
Military units in city do not decrease unhappiness - no martial law.
Military units not in city increase unhappiness.
Units require 1 resource per turn to maintain.

*DEMOCRACY
A democracy government dramatically increases trade in the same manner as a
republic and has one major additional advantage. There is no corruption in
cities under a democracy, which makes it very useful for large empires.
However, a democracy has two unique worries. First, military units not in
their home city cause two citizens to be unhappy, not one citizen as in a
republic. This makes war especially hard to wage. Also, if any city in a
democracy slips into civil disorder, the government is immediately overthrown
and becomes an anarchy for several turns. While a democracy has tremendous
economic advantages, it is fragile and requires vigilance.
*DEMOCRACY2
+1 trade per square where trade exists.
Must accept all peace offers.
Military units in city do not decrease unhappiness - no martial law.
Military units not in city increase unhappiness.
Units require 1 resource per turn to maintain.
No corruption. Civil disorder leads to Anarchy.

*POLLUTION
Pollution may be caused by large resource production in cities, large city
populations, nuclear weapons, or the meltdown of a Nuclear Power Plant. If a
city has a potential pollution problem, smokestacks in the city display
information window indicate the probability that a nearby map square may
become polluted.
*POLLUTION2
The pollution in a map square may be cleaned up by a Settler.
Move the Settler into the square and press the Pollution key (P key) or choose
the Pollution option from the Orders menu. It takes four turns of work to
clean up pollution. If pollution gets out of control, global warming may
occur.

*SENTRY
Units ordered to go on sentry duty are shown faded out on the game display
and thereafter do not flash each turn waiting for orders. This is useful when
you have a unit in a square where you wish to leave it and do not, or cannot,
have it fortify. Also, sentry units in a city are automatically loaded onto
any ship that can carry them and sails out of the city.
*SENTRY2
Place a unit on sentry duty by pressing the Sentry key (S key) or by choosing the Sentry
option from the Orders menu. A Sentry unit may be activated by clicking on
it with the LMB, or when an enemy unit moves adjacent to it.

*LUXURIES
The provision of luxuries for the people of your cities is indicated by the
bright diamond symbols in the resource window of the city display. Each two
luxuries makes one contented citizen happy, or one unhappy citizen content. The
amount of luxuries a city produces is mainly determined by the luxury rate of
your civilization, the percentage of each city's trade that arrives as
luxuries. You can modify this rate by adjusting your tax and science rates from
the Game menu.
*LUXURIES2
You can also increase luxuries by building
Marketplace and Bank improvements, and by turning some of your citizens into
Entertainers.

*TAXES
The taxes collected by a city is indicated by the gold coin symbols in the
resource window of the city map display. The taxes collected by the city are
first put toward paying for the maintainence of the improvements that exist
in the city. Any surplus is added to the treasury and any shortfall is
withdrawn from the treasury. The amount of taxes a city produces is mainly
determined by the tax rate of the civilization, the percentage of each city's
trade that arrives as taxes. You can modify this rate by adjusting your tax
rate from the Game menu. 
*TAXES2
You can also increase taxes by building Marketplace
and Bank improvements, and by turning some of your citizens into Taxmen.

*SCIENCE
The science research contributed by a city is indicated by the light bulb
symbols in the resource window of the city display. The science from a city
is added to previous research and, if enough research has been done, a new
civilization advance is achieved. The amount of science a city produces is
mainly determined by the science rate of your civilization, the percentage of
each city's trade that arrives as new knowledge. You can modify this rate by
adjusting your science rate from the Game menu.
*SCIENCE2
You can also increase science
by building Library and University improvements, certain Wonders, and by
turning some of your citizens into Scientists.

*TRADE ROUTES
Trade routes are established when you move a Caravan into another city, either
one of your own at least ten map squares from the Caravan's home city, or a
rival's city. The arrival of a Caravan results in an immediate payment of cash
into your treasury plus the trade route. A trade route increases the trade
generated by the Caravan's home city each turn thereafter, unless the
connected city is destroyed. The value of a trade route is highest between a
rival city on another continent, and increases with the size of both cities
involved and the distance they are apart. Trade routes are essential to strong
economies and large civilizations.

*TRADE ROUTES2
Created by Caravans.

*END

